---
title: Udayan Care_ Standards of Care in CCIs
author: Navneeth
tags: Practitioner
---

 Tags: [CCI Operations](CCI%20Operations)
# Key International Instruments on Rights of Children 
- UN Declaration on Rights of the Child, 1959 
- Minimum Age Convention, 1973 
- UN Convention on Rights of the Child, 1989 
- UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985  (the Beijing rules) 
- UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, 1990 
- Optional Protocol to the CRC on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child Pornography, 2000 
- Optional Protocol to the CRC on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, 2000 
- UN Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children (UNGACC), 200 (Page 10)
- The UN Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children (Page 12)

# CCI Operations 
- Facilities providing residential care should be small and be organized around the rights and needs of the child, in a setting as close as possible to a family or small group situation. 
- Their objective should generally be to provide temporary care and to contribute actively to the child’s family reintegration or, if this is not possible, to secure his/her stable care in an alternative family setting, including through adoption or kafala of Islamic law, where appropriate.
	- (Paragraph 123)Measures should be taken so that, where necessary and appropriate, a child solely in need of protection and alternative care may be accommodated separately from children who are subject to the criminal justice system. 
	- (Paragraph 124)The competent national or local authority should establish rigorous screening procedures to ensure that only appropriate admissions to such facilities are made.( (Page 12)
- States should ensure that there are sufficient carers in residential care settings to allow individualized attention and to give the child, where appropriate, the opportunity to bond with a specific carer. Carers should also be deployed within the care setting in such a way as to implement effectively its aims and objectives and ensure child protection.
- (Paragraph 126)Laws, policies and regulations should prohibit the recruitment and solicitation of children for placement in residential care by agencies, facilities or individuals.(Paragraph 127) (Page 13)

## Types of CCI Registrations

- Under Section 41(6) of the JJ Act 2015, the period of registration of an institution shall be valid for five years, with the provision for renewal in every five years. 
- The Act also stipulates granting of provisional registration, with six months validity, within one month of receipt of an application for registration Section 41(3). 
- According to Rule 21 of the JJ Rules 2016, application for registration of CCI is required to be submitted in Form 27 together with copies of following documents:  
	 - Rules 
	- Bye-laws 
	- Memorandum of Association 
	- List of governing body 
	- Office bearers 
	- Trustees 
	- Balance sheet of preceding three years 
	- Statement of past record of social or public service provided by the CCI to state government 
	- Declaration from the person or the organization regarding any previous conviction, or involvement in any immoral act or child abuse or employment of child labour, or it has not been blacklisted by the Central or State Government (Page 14)
- Physical infrastructure (Rule 29)Separation of premises for children in conflict with law and those in need of care and protection; criteria for accommodation like separate CCIs for girls and boys; classification and segregation according to age, nature of offences (applicable for juvenile in conflict with law) and mental and physical status; and norms for building; proper and non-slippery flooring; lighting, ventilation, heating, cooling, toilet (gender and age appropriate and disabled friendly), water, first-aid kit, fire extinguishers; dormitories, and rooms for vocational training, recreation, store and counselling; periodic inspection of electrical installations; proper storage and inspection of food; facilities and equipment for differently-abled children; other logistical and functional items like computers, photocopiers, printer, telephone with internet, furniture and projector.CCIs should be child-friendly and should not look like a jail or lock-up.Clothing, bedding and toiletries (Rule 30)Clothing and bedding according to scale and climatic conditions; miscellaneous items like slippers, shoes (sports/school), school uniform, school bag, handkerchief, socks, stationery etc.; suit once in three years; night clothing and bedding for hospitals attached to CCIs; and toiletries like oil, soap and other material like broomstick, mosquito repellant machine etc. as per scale.Sanitation and hygiene (Rule 31)Facilities like water for drinking and other purposes, proper drainage, garbage disposal, pest control, toilets (at least one for seven children), bathroom (at least one for 10 children), fly-proof kitchen, disinfection of beddings etc.Daily routine (Rule 32)These are children’s daily activities meant for a regulated and disciplined life which include, inter alia, personal hygiene, cleanliness, educational classes, physical exercise, vocational training, recreation and games, moral education, group activities and prayers.  (Page 17)
- f Caref CareInstitutChild InstitutChild Nutrition and diet scale  (Rule 33)Quality and quantity of food that children under institutional care are entitled to receive daily, adherence to diet scale and minimum nutritional standard, provision for special meals on holidays and festivals, special diet for infants and sick children, and meal timing and menuMedical care (Rule 34)Arrangements for medical facilities, maintenance of medical record of each child, referral services, immunization, counselling, training of staff on first aid, preventive healthcare, entry-level investigation of Complete Blood Count, Urine Routine, HIV, VDRL, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and allergy/addiction to drugs, and psycho-social profile of each childMental health (Rule 35)Maintenance of mental health record, enabling environment in CCIs that nourishes mental health, individual therapy, services of trained counselors, and psychological evaluation and diagnosis under trained professionalsEducation (Rule 36)Education according to age and ability of child both inside CCIs or outside, a range of educational opportunities (like mainstream school, bridge school, open school and non-formal education), specialized trainers and experts for children with special needs, and extra coaching according to needsVocational training (Rule 37)Vocational training according to age, aptitude, interest and ability of children, in-house training or training in collaboration with external institutions. It covers occupational therapy, and skill and interest based training having potential for placement.Recreational facilities (Rule 38)Indoor and outdoor games, yoga, meditation, music, television, picnics and outings and cultural programmes, gardening, library, dance, art therapy etc., and child-friendly library (Page 18)
- Children as Members of Management Committee: According to Rule 39 (3) of the JJ Rules 2016, the management committee of a child care institution shall have ‘two child representatives from each of the Children’s Committees’ as members.  yChildren’s Suggestion Box: The management committee of every CCI is required to put in place a complaint and redressal mechanism for the benefit of children. According to Rule 39 (5) of the JJ Rules 2016, a Children’s Suggestion Box shall be installed closer to the residential area of CCI, so that children can have easy access to the facility. The Chairperson of the management committee or his representative from DCPU checks the suggestions of children every week in presence of members of children’s committees. The Rule also requires the Chairperson to call for an emergency meeting of the management committee to discuss and act on  (Page 18)
- Standards of Care inStandards of Care inChild suggestions of urgent nature. Besides other members, two members of the children’s committee participate in any such emergency meeting. The suggestions received through Suggestion Box and actions taken on the basis of emergency meeting are discussed and reviewed in the monthly meeting of the management committee.  yChildren’s Suggestion Book: Under the above-cited rule, every child care institution is required to maintain a Children’s Suggestion Book (CSB) in order to record complaints and actions taken by the management committee. These particulars are intimated to children’s committees every month after meeting of the management committee. The CSB is reviewed by management committee at least once a month.  yChildren’s Committees: The system of children’s committee is a mechanism for ensuring involvement of children in the decision-making processes of the institution. According to Rule 40 of the JJ Rules 2016, every CCI should facilitate setting up of children’s committees for three different age groups of children namely 6-10 years, 11-15 years and 16-18 years. Significantly, children’s committees shall be solely constituted by children. Besides participation in management through the management committee, these committees are encouraged to participate in the following activities:  3Improvement of the condition of CCI  3Review of standards of care  3Preparation of daily routine and diet scale 3Development of plans for education, vocational training and recreation 3Crisis management amongst themselves 3Reporting abuse by peers and caregivers 3Creative expression of views through wall papers, paintings, newsletter etc. As facilitators of the process, the child care institutions are required to ensure that the children’s committees meet every month, their records are maintained properly, and are provided with necessary support, space, stationery and guidance.  (Page 19)
- tandards of Care intandards of Care inProcedures to be followed at the time of receiving a child (Rule 69 F) (Page 20)
- The child’s full personal description is noted in admission and discharge register. The child is searched with decency and dignity, and personal belongings are kept according to  Rule 71 (articles found on search and inspection) and Rule 72 (disposal of articles).Food and drink are given to the child, if the child is hungry.Necessary medical care is provided to the child in case of ill health, injury, mental ailment,  disease or addiction.Segregation of the child in specially earmarked dormitory or ward or hospital if the child is  suffering from contagious or infectious disease requiring special care and cautionA note on status of the child’s immediate and urgent needs, if any, like appearing in an examination or interview or contacting family members is prepared and put up before the Child Welfare Officer (CWO)  or Case Worker (CW) to whom the child is assigned. The note is also kept in the child’s case file. (Page 20)
- Procedures to be followed after the child is received (Rule 69 G) (Page 20)
- The child is photographed. One photograph is kept in the case file, one is fixed in the index card, one is kept in the album, and one is sent to the CWC or JJB as well as the DCPU. The photograph is also uploaded on the designated portal. The child may take a bath. Toiletry items, new clothes, bedding and other outfits and equipment are issued to the child as per Rule 30 of JJ Rules 2016, and a list these items are kept in case file.The child is familiarized with CCI and its functioning (like discipline, daily routine, rights and obligations, personal health etc.)Examination of the child by a medical officer, and the child’s state of health, including wound or mark on the body, is recorded and placed in the medical record of the childA CWO or CW is assigned to the child by the CCI (Page 20)
- Standards of Care inStandards of Care inChild Child Procedures to the followed during first fourteen days of receiving the child (Rule 69 H)The assigned CWO or CW interacts with the child as often as possible.The child may be examined by a panel of doctors, if necessary, within two days. The purpose is to understand physical, medical, psychological state and level of addiction, if any, for assessing the child’s personality and for generating inputs for rehabilitation plan. The concerned CWO or CW interacts with possible and available sources like family members, friends, relatives, employer, community of the child and others. The purpose is to prepare a case history in Form No. 43 and maintain in the child’s case file.The concerned CWO or CW assesses the educational level and vocational aptitude on the basis of tests and interviews. Linkages with outside specialists like psychologist and psychiatrist, and agencies like hospital and NGOs shall be established as necessary.A CWO or CW is assigned to the child by the CCIProcedure to be followed on expiry of first fourteen days (Rule 69 I)The child is shifted to a regular dormitory of CCI. The child is assigned a specific bed, cabinet and study table in the dormitory. This is done keeping in view the child’s age, nature of offence committed by or against the child, and physical and mental status. Children in need of special care are allotted different dormitory. An individual care plan is prepared keeping in view the child’s case history, education and vocational aptitude. For children under rehabilitation stay, the care plan covers the entire period of stay; and it accommodates the directions of CWC, JJB and children’s court. Form 7 given in JJ Rules 2016 is used for preparing individual care plan. Individual care plan is reviewed by CWO or CWCWO or CW maintains a record of difficulties, if any, faced by the child during the period of stay in CCI. CWO or CW keeps of a record of complaints by the child regarding the facilities of CCI.The individual care plan is reviewed every fortnight during first three months of stay in CCI, and thereafter every month. (Page 21)
- Procedure to be followed after three months (Rule 69 J)Progress of the child is examined keeping in view the aims and targets noted in the individual care plan. The management committee of CCI perused the quarterly progress report of the child.Following consideration by the management committee; the individual care plan, daily routine and approach towards rehabilitation of the child are suitably modified, and noted in the case file. The child’s progress is recorded in the rehabilitation card in Form 14.  (Page 21)
- Standards of Care inStandards of Care inInstitutions ChildInstitutions ChildProcedure to be followed for release of the child from a CCI (Rule 79)The Person-in-charge of the CCI maintains a roster of the cases of children to be released.Information about the release including exact date of release is given to the parent or guardian of the child. The parent or guardian is called to the CCI on that date to take charge of the child. Expenses for travel of the child from the CCI and, if necessary, for parent’s or guardian’s both ways journey are paid to the parent or guardian. If the date of release falls on a Sunday or a public holiday, the child may be discharged on the preceding day. If parent or guardian fails to take charge of the child, an escort of the CCI (in case of girl, female escort) takes the child to parent or guardian for handing over the custody. The rule prescribes for the following financial and non-financial benefits linked to release: ª The child is provided with a set of suitable clothing and essential toiletries.ª On attaining 18 years of age, and if eligible, a child may be placed in an aftercare programme. This requires consent of the child, and approval of the Board or Committee or the Children’s Court.ª In suitable cases, the Person-in-charge may order payment of subsistence money and railway/road fares.ª If a girl child has no place to go and requests for stay in the CCI after completion of her period of stay, a limited period of stay, till suitable arrangement is made, is allowed subject to approval of the CWC or JJB or Children’s Court. (Page 22)
- The Rule 69 N prescribes following actions to deal with unacceptable behaviour:  3Formal warning 3Assignment of house-keeping tasks 3Imposition writing i.e. writing a number of times that the child would not repeat the behaviour 3Forfeiture of privileges like television watching, sports, recreation and other outdoor activitiesThe rules, however, prohibit corporal punishment or any mental harassment of the child that affects the child’s dignity. Significantly, the JJ Rules 2016 not only elaborates the scope of good behaviour but also enjoins the CCI to reward children for exceptionally good behaviour. (Page 22)
- StandarCCExceptionally good behaviour, according to JJ Rules 2016, include, inter alia, the following:  yAdherence to rules of discipline and routine yPreventing fellow children from violence and unacceptable behaviour yHelping other child coming out of trauma yInforming Person-in-charge about any prohibited article or contraband  yExceptionally good performance in studies and training yPositive and adaptive behaviour (Page 23)
- Rule 76 of JJ Rules 2016 prescribes a set of actions that need to be performed if any physical, sexual or emotional abuse, including neglect, of the child occurs, as the flow chart below indicates. Incidence is reported by sta to Person-in-charge immediatelyPerson-in-charge reports to JJB/CWC which orders special investigationJJB/CWC directs local police station or special juvenile police unit to registera case, take cognizance of the matter and conduct investigationJJB/CWC ensures completion of inquiry, and provideslegal aid as well as counseling to the child victimJJB/CWC transfers the child victim to another institution or place ofsafety or t personPerson-in-charge also informs chairperson of management committee and places a report of the incident including action taken before management committee in its next meetingIn the event of any other crime, the JJB/CWC takes cognizance of the matter and arranges for its investigation by local police station or special juvenile police unitWhile dealing with the matter, JJB/CWC may consult children’s committee, voluntary organizations, child rights experts, mental health experts or crisis intervention centres. (Page 23)
- InstitutInstitutMaintenance of case file (Rule 73)Case file containing detailed information is maintained for each child, and is treated as confidential. It shall contain, inter alia, report of the person or agency who produced the child before the CWC or JJB or Children’s Court, police report, copy of FIR or daily diary entry, photo ID (if available), order of assignment of CW or CWO, case history form, report of any urgent need of the child, psychosocial profiling of the child, copy of personal belonging register, rehabilitation card, quarterly progress report, feedback given by the child, and annual photograph. Maintenance of registers (Rule 77)The rule presents a list of 25 registers that the CCIs are required to maintain. For each register in the list, the designation of official who maintains it and the one who acts  as its custodian are stated. Except two registers namely Meals Register/Nutrition Diet  File and Visitors’ Book, the custodian of all other registers is the Person-in-charge. The officials who maintain the registers are the ones directly responsible for the specific function that the register is meant for. For example, cash book is maintained by Accounts Officer/Cashier, Counselling Register is maintained by Counsellor and so on. Openness and transparency  (Rule 78)CCIs remain open to visitors with the permission of the JJB or CWC or Person-in-charge. Visitors may include, inter alia, voluntary organizations, social workers, researchers and academicians. The Person-in-charge should also encourage involvement of local community or corporate that may improve condition of CCI. The Person-in-charge is also required to inform the visitors to maintain dignity of children. Prohibited articles  (Rule 70)No one is allowed to bring into the CCI the following articles:  yIntoxicants, psychotropic substances, liquor, bhang, ganja, opium, smack etc. yAll explosives, poisonous substances, acid and chemicals  yAll arms, ammunition, weapons, knives and cutting instruments  yAll obscene matter yString, rope, chains and all material which can be converted into string or rope or chain yWood, bamboo, club, stick, ladder, bricks, stone and earth of every description yPlaying cards and other implements for gambling yTobacco items, pan masala or similar item yMedicine that has not been specifically prescribed  yAny other articles specified by the State governmentAll bullion, metal, coin, jewellery, ornaments, currency notes, securities and articles of value like mobile phone, digital camera, i-pad etc. are required to be deposited in safe custody of CCI. (Page 24)
- dards of Care inInstitutions Institutions Composition and functioning of management committee (Rule 39)Management committee of each CCI shall consist of District Child Protection Officer-Chairperson, Person-in-charge-Member Secretary, and the following as members: probation officer/child welfare officer/case worker, medical officer, psychologist/counselor, workshop supervisor/instructor in vocation, teacher, social worker member of JJB/CWC and two representatives from each of the children’s committees. The management committee shall meet at least once in a month to consider and review all matters pertaining to care of children like education, health including mental health, food, recreation, legal aid services, vocational training, release, restoration, rehabilitation, daily routine, community participation etc.Visit to and communication with children (Rule 74)The parents and relatives of children may be permitted to visit their children once in a week. In case of a newly received child, meeting with parent/guardian/relative is permitted on their first visit on any day. The rule does not permit meeting of children with parents or guardians or relatives who have been found to be involved in abuse, exploitation and violence against the child or carrying any prohibited articles. However, such meeting can take place with the permission of JJB or CWC or Children’s Court or under direction of child’s counselor.Children are allowed to write two letters to parents/relatives in a week. The role allows the Person-in-charge to peruse any letter written by or to the child, and refuse to deliver or issue it. The reason for such action is required to be written in the child’s case file. A report on the matter is placed before the CCI’s management committee, and a copy is sent to JJB or CWC or Children’s Court.Children are also allowed to speak with their parents or guardians on telephone once a week under supervision of CWO or CW or probation officer. The rule has details of procedures to be followed for allowing visitors to meet the child- disclosure of proof of identity by visitors, checking for objectionable articles etc.Death of a child  (Rule 75)In case of death or suicide, CCI must ensure an inquest and post-mortem examination at the earliest. The case worker or probation officer or child welfare officer immediately informs the Person-in-charge and the medical officer, and the Person-in-charge immediately informs the nearest police station, JJB or CWC and parents/guardians/relatives of the deceased child. In case of natural death or death due to illness, the Person-in-charge obtains a medical report stating the cause of death, and a written intimation is sent to nearest police station, JJB or CWC and parents/guardians/relatives of the child.If a child dies within 24 hours of admission to the CCI, the Person-in-Charge shall report the matter to the police, district medical officer or the nearest government hospital and the parents or guardians or relatives.Following completion of inquest, the body shall be handed over to the parent or guardian or relatives. In the absence of any claimant, the last rites shall be performed by the CCI in accordance with the child’s known religion.  (Page 25)
- Standards of CareInstitutons Child Institutns Child Child suffering from disease and some related matter  (Rule 80)For a child in need of prolonged medical treatment (like cases of mental illness, addiction to drugs, alcohol etc.), the CWC or JJB or Children’s Court may send the child to a fit facility for proper treatment for a specified period. The order is based on recommendation of a medical officer or the Person-in-charge or Probation Officer or CWO or CW. Following cure, the CWC or JJB of Children’s Court places the child back in the care or discharges if further care is not required. Leave of absence to a child  (Section 98, JJ Act 2015) Children are allowed to go on leave of absence or released under supervision on special occasions like examination, marriage, death, serious illness or other emergencies. Leave of absence is generally granted for a period not exceeding seven days. The permission for this is given by CWC or JJB as the case may be. Inspection by state government (Rule 41 and Section 54 of JJ Act 2015) and evaluation (Rule 42)State governments are required to constitute inspection committees for State and district for the CI registered or recognized under the JJ Act 2015. While inspections are made once in three months, reports are submitted to DCPU and state government within a week, and actions are taken within a month. Evaluation of CCIs may be done by Central Government or State Government once in three years. Its purpose is to strengthen and improve functioning.Personnel for CCI (Rule 26)The rule deals with the basis for staffing like categories of children, capacity of CCI, nature of duties, hours of duty etc. While key regular staff include person-in-charge, probation officer/CWO/CW, counselor/psychologist/mental health expert, house mother/house father, para-medical staff/staff nurse/nursing orderly and storekeeper-cum-accountant; educator/tutor, medical officer, art & craft & activity teacher and PT instructor-cum-yoga teacher psychiatrist may be hired as part-time staff. The rule suggests a staffing pattern for a CCI with capacity for 100 children. Some other important conditions to be followed include the following: yOnly female person-in-charge and staff to be appointed for CCIs housing girls yThose associated with CCIs should not be convicted persons or those involved in immoral act, child abuse, employment of child labour, moral turpitude or should hold any political office during his/her tenure yNo one should be appointed or work in CCIs without police verification. yCCIs housing infants should hire ayahs and paramedical staff as per need. (Page 26)
- Standards of CStandards of CChild Child Rehabilitation and Reintegration services in institutions registered under the JJ Act, 2015i. Basic requirements such as food, shelter, clothing and medical attention as per the prescribed standardsii. Equipment such as wheel-chairs, prosthetic devices, hearing aids, Braille kits, or any other suitable aids and appliances as required, for children with special needsiii. Appropriate education, including supplementary education, special education, and appropriate education for children with special needs (Provided that for children between the age of six to fourteen years, the provisions of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 shall apply)iv. Skill developmentv. Occupational therapy and life skill educationvi. Mental health interventions, including counselling specific to the need of the childvii. Recreational activities including sports and cultural activitiesviii. Legal aid where requiredix. Referral services for education, vocational training, de-addiction, treatment of diseases where requiredx. Case management including preparation and follow up of individual care planxi. Birth registrationxii. Assistance for obtaining the proof of identity, where requiredxiii. Any other service that may reasonably be provided in order to ensure the well-being of the child, either directly by the State Government, registered or fit individuals or institutions or through referral servicesReference: Section 53(1), JJ Act, 2015 (Page 27)
- Child Child Some Institutional Care Practices in India and across the World (Page 29)
- SOS Children’s Village- A Unique Child care ModelSOS Children’s Villages of India has been providing institutional child care in the country since 1964. The SOS model ensures home-like environment that is based on four fundamental principles as noted below: The Mother: Every child has a caring parent.Brothers and Sisters: Every child has a family ties and they grow up with a sense of responsibility and a spirit of sharing. The House: A place where the child feels secure and has a sense of belonging.The Village: A community that surrounds the child, so that every child has roots.According to the model, each SOS Children’s Village has certain number of houses that the children call their homes. Each SOS family houses an average of 10 boys and girls of up to 14 years age and the SOS mother, who is responsible for providing care, security and emotional support to the children. The mother manages the house independently like it is done in any other household. After attaining 14 years of age, boys are sent to youth houses. Each SOS Children’s Village creates a village-like community which allows children to mingle with their peers and families to share their experiences. The Village provides support for children’s education, healthcare, psychological development, career, marriage and other development needs till the time they are fully settled in their lives. Palna- A Novel Intervention of Delhi Council for Child Welfare (DCCW)Palna (or cradle in English) is an old and novel intervention of DCCW that combines care with a unique method of receiving children. At Palna, a cradle is placed outside the gate of the compound in order to allow parents to leave their children without identifying themselves. While the CCI receives most of its children through this method, children also come through police and hospitals. As DCCW attaches importance to family, it first tries to restore children to their biological parents. If this fails, they are placed in adoption. Palna provides healthcare, non-formal education, recreation, nutrition and other essential services to children. (Page 29)
- Standards of Care inStandards of Care inChild Group Care (GC)- A Pioneering Model of Udayan CareGC is an innovative child care model that creates the warmth of a family with strong community interface having potential for neutralizing the stresses of institutional child care. The model is based on a strategy called LIFE (Living in Family Environment) that focuses on long term residential care of orphaned and abandoned children of above 6 years age in ‘LIFE Udayan Ghars’ or ‘Sunshine Homes’. Each LIFE Udayan Ghar, located in a community setting in middleclass neighbourhood, houses not more than 12 children of same gender that creates a home-like setting for the children under the overall guidance of Mentor Parents and socially-oriented staff and volunteers. In other words, it is a foster family that takes care of a group of targeted children. The system creates space for parental attachment, interaction with community, good in-house relationship, responsible primary socialization and children’s emotional enrichment. Distinctive Features of Udayan Care’s Model of Child Care ySmall size Homes that resemble a family yIndividualized child care yBest interests of children guarded and promoted yMentor parents as lifetime volunteers yCare under guidance of professional caregivers yEffective and efficient compliance with standards of child care yChild feel attached and cared at homes and integrated with community yAn effective and guided aftercare programme that ensures proper settlement yUnique community outreach that allows children’s social integration and community’s involvement in child care with a sense of ownership yEmphasis on programmatic innovation and capacity of building of staff (Page 30)
- Mill Grove London, United KingdomMill Gove is a unique example of a residential care home that is working with the community for the benefit of the children. It started in 1899 as an informal foster family–a home for destitute and motherless children, as noted in the organisation’s first Annual Report. “It is still a place of love and care where children and young people who cannot live with their own families may be fostered, or for families who need accommodation and support. … Over 1,000 children have lived here for all or part of their childhood and many of these … regard Mill Grove as their home.” Mill Grove has also been especially supporting local families with young children since 1976. There are outdoor facilities, including a school for children with cerebral palsy. (Page 30)
- Standards of Care inStandards of Care inChChKids Alive International: A Global Child Care InitiativeKids Alive International (KAI) began its operation in China in the year 1916. It now operates in 15 countries in Africa, Asia, Middle East, Eastern Europe, Latin America and Pacific Rim with focus on care of children who are orphans, abandoned, abused, on the streets and victims of poverty, disease or war. KAI has been taking care of these children through its residential homes, care centres and schools. It also operates medical centres, community outreach programmes including micro-enterprise solutions for economic development and in certain cases, disaster relief operations. The three important components of intervention of KAI are rescue of homeless children, fulfilling their educational needs and strengthening the communities. (Page 31)
- andards of Care inandards of Care inhild hild Data Management for Effective Implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act, Briefing Paper Series 8, UNICEF (New Delhi, 2011). Available at http://unicef.in/Uploads/Publications/Resources/ pub_doc73.pdfGrant, Gill. One or the Other- or Both? Child Care Alternatives for Vulnerable Children. Available at http://www.ccih.org/Child_Care_Alternatives_for_Vulnerable_Children.pdfhttps://www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/Keeping_Children_Out_of_Harmful_Institutions_Final_20.11.09_1.pdfhttp://naco.gov.in/upload/2015%20MSLNS/HSS/India%20HIV%20Estimations%202015.pdfhttp://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/One-lakh-children-go-missing-in-India-every-year-Home-ministry/articleshow/39779841.cmshttp://indianexpress.com/article/explained/national-crime-records-bureau-data-2015-slight-dip-in-rape-crime-against-women-3004980/http://mief.in/mental-sickness-in-children-in-india-an-overview/http://www.naco.gov.in/sites/default/files/HIV%20DATA.pdfInstitutionalised Children: Seminar on Standards of Care and Mental Health- A Report, March 14-15, 2014, Udayan Care (New Delhi, 2014). Available at http://www.udayancare.org/seminar-journal/Institutionalised%20_Children_Revised.pdfIntegrated Child Protection Scheme, 2014Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016Rules under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) (as amended by the Amendment Act 33 of 2006), 26 October 2007Study on Child Abuse: India 2007, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India (New Delhi: Kirti, 2007). Website: http://www.childlineindia.org.in/pdf/MWCD-Child-Abuse-Report.pdfSubjective Wellbeing of Children Living in Institutions of Delhi- A Rights Based Perspective, Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights (New Delhi, 2014). Available at http://delhi.gov.in/wps/wcm/connect/doit_dcpcr/DCPCR/Publication/Subjective+Wellbeing+of+Children+Living+in+Institutions+in+DelhiThe Essentials of Child Protection: A Handbook for Beginners, CHILDLINE India Foundation (Mumbai, 2008). Available at www.childlineindia.org.in/pdf/Essentials-of-child-protection-Oct%2008.pdfThe Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (No. 2 of 2016)The National Policy for Children, 2013. Available at http://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/npcenglish08072013_0.pdf (Page 34)

## Source
[[Volume 1/Volume 1 Public Resource Links/Queue/Volume 1 Queue/UdayanCare_Standardsofcareinchildcareinstitutions (1).pdf]]