- Vipul Jain | President and Co-founder | CSA (Page 2)
- Satyajeet Mazumdar | Head - Advocacy | CSA (Page 2)
- As pera recent report of the NationalCommission for Protection of ChildRights, more than 2.5 lakh children aregrowing up in 7163 CCIs. (Page 6)
- The same 2018 study byMWCD found almost 33% of the childrenin CCIs to be those with single parents,15% being orphan / abandoned /surrendered children, and about 9%being victims of child sexual abuse,victims of traﬃcking, child labour,runaway / missing children, victims ofchild marriage, children aﬀected andinfected by HIV and AIDS, victims ofman-made and natural disasters,homeless children, and children who arementally and/or physically challenged.The above categories form about 57% ofthe child population in CCIs. (Page 6)
- Taking data from the 2011 census,UNICEF and Childline, we can safelyconclude that at least 20 million out of the170 million vulnerable children in Indiacould be in situations of extreme risk andvulnerability, needing immediatesupport from the system. (Page 6)
- The reality, however, is that only about45% CCIs receive some funding from theGovernment, which also is intermittentand in arrears. (Page 7)
- RIGHT TOTo life, health, nutrition, name,nationalitySURVIVALTo education, care, leisure,recreation, cultural activitiesFrom explanation abuse,neglectTo expression information,thought, religionDEVELOPMENTPROTECTIONPARTICIPATIONRights of children as per UNCRC. (Page 10)
- The decision of what interventionis best suited for CNCP rests with theChild Welfare Committee (CWC),including exit and entry into institutionalcare13. The decision is taken on the basisof the Social Investigation Reportsubmitted by Child Welfare Oﬃcer. TheCWC also takes into account the child’swishes in case the child is suﬃcientlymature to take a view14. (Page 11)
- RESTORATION OF THE CHILD TO PARENTS ORGUARDIANPLACEMENT OF THE CHILD IN A CHILD CAREINSTITUTION (CCI)PLACEMENT OF THE CHILD WITH FIT PERSONFOR LONG TERM OR TEMPORARY CAREADOPTIONFOSTER CARESPONSORSHI (Page 12)
- PRehabilitation options recognized by the JJ Act. (Page 12)
- PRESENTATIONBEFORE CWCPLACEMENT INSAFE CUSTODYINQUIRYORDERBy any citizen, authorities,or child himselfIn a governmentregistered CCI, if deemednecessaryTo ascertain needs ofchild; to be completedwithin 15 daysOn conslderatlon of SIRand taklng Into accountwishes of child01020304Procedure followed by CWC. (Page 13)
- A recent report of the NationalCommission for Protection of ChildRights (NCPCR)23 puts the total numberchild care institutions (CCIs) in India as7163, of which 5977 are Children’s Home,and the number of children residing inCCIs as 2.56 lakh. This is a sharp fall, bothin the number of CCIs and number ofchildren in institutional care, whencompared with ﬁgures of 2018 publishedin a study of the MWCD, which put thenumber of CCIs at 9589, and number ofchildren at 3.7 lakh. (Page 14)
- As per the NCPCR report, 88% CCIs arerun by private non-proﬁt organizationswhile only 12% are run by theGovernment. (Page 14)
- There have been only between3500-4500 adoptions in India throughthe Central Adoption ResourceAuthority (CARA) over the last 5years26 (Page 15)
- Only 45% of the CCIs receiveGovernment funding under theChild Protection Services(CPS) Scheme (erstwhileIntegrated Child ProtectionScheme; as per the 2018 MWCDreport), which is supposed to beRs. 2160 per child per month.More than half of the totalnumber of CCIs do not receiveany support. (Page 17)
- The timing and process ofdisbursal is very uncertain, andis in most cases paid in arrears,making it very diﬃcult for CCIsto plan their fund ﬂow. (Page 17)
- Deinstitutionalization driven bytargets or ideology can lead toadverse consequences: Over the lasttwo years, we have seen large scaledeinstitutionalisation taking placeand many CCIs closing down. This isevident from a comparison of datafrom the MWCD 2019 (9589 CCIs, 3.7lakh children) and NCPCR 2020 (7163CCIs, 2.5 lakh children) reports. (Page 19)
- The risk of systemic abusein CCIs can be further minimised bytraining of care givers, creatingawareness among children, setting upof Children’s Committees etc. (Page 20)
- More intensive vulnerabilitymapping – As mentioned above, avery small percentage of 20-25 millionvulnerable children in India presentlyreceive support in any form from theGovernment. An eﬀective way ofensuring more children are identiﬁedand supported can be to trainfrontline workers (like Anganwadiand Asha workers as well as socialworkers of NGOs) on provisions ofthe JJ Act so that they can identifychildren in need of care andprotection. (Page 21)
- Digitisation and standardisation ofdata collection and collation (Page 21)
- To ensure this, it isnecessary that the CWC and DCPU onthe ground have the capacity toevaluate the situation of the child andfamily by conducting socialinvestigation, and have resources tolink the family to social welfareschemes and monitor the childperiodically. (Page 21)
- Building adoption and foster carecapability and capacity (Page 22)
- We recommend that the governmentset up a task force to standardise themethodology and tools to evaluatecompliance with JJ Act as well ascollection of child data outcomes inkey areas like health, hygiene,education, life skills, etc. Themethodology and collation of datashould be standard and digitalised sothat data is available to diﬀerentstakeholders in updated and realtimemanner. (Page 22)
- Enhancing Aftercare for CareLeavers who exit institutions at theage of 18 (Page 22)
- The process of funding needs to beimproved and digitised. It should bemade transparent and predictable.For example, for every CNCPapproved by CWC for placement in aregistered CCI, Rs 2000 per month (orany other predetermined sum ofmoney) should be deposited into theCCI’s bank account with no furtherquestions asked. If the data ofchildren in a CCI is accurate and realtime, the funds can be made availablewithout risk of misappropriation. (Page 23)

## Source
[[CNCP-Paper Annotated_Akshay.pdf]]