- All decisions concerning alternative care should take full account of the desirability, in principle, of maintaining the child as close as possible to his/her habitual place of residence, in order to facilitate contact and potential reintegration with his/her familyand to minimize disruption of his/her educational, cultural and social life. (Page 4)
- Decisions regarding children in alternative care, including those in informal care, should have due regard for the importance of ensuring children a stable home and of meeting their basic need for safe and continuous attachment to their caregivers, with permanencygenerallybeing a key goal. (Page 4)
- Siblings with existing bonds should in principle not be separated by placements in alternative care unless there is a clear risk of abuse or other justification in the best interests of the child. In anycase, every effort should be made to enable siblings to maintain contact with each other, unless this is against their wishes or interests. (Page 4)
- To this end, States should establish care standards to ensure the qualityand conditions that are conducive to the child’s development, such as individualized and small-group care, and should evaluate existing facilities against these standards. Decisions regarding the establishment of, orpermission to establish, new residential care facilities, whether public or private, should take full account of this deinstitutionalization objective and strategy. (Page 5)
- Family strengthening services, such as parenting courses and sessions, the promotion of positive parent-child relationships, conflict resolution skills, opportunities for employmentandincome generation and, where required, social assistance; (Page 8)
- When a child is relinquished or abandoned, States should ensure that this may take place in conditions of confidentialityand safety for the child, respecting his/her right to access information on his/her origins where appropriate and possible under the law of the State. (Page 9)
- the State should ensure that the familyreceives counselling and social support to encourageand enable themto continue to care for the child. (Page 9)
- When a public or private agency or facilityis approached by a parent or caregiver wishing to place a child in care for a short or indefinite period, the State should ensure the availabilityof counselling and social support to encourage and enable himorherto continue to care for the child. Achild should be admitted to alternative care onlywhen such efforts have been exhausted and acceptable and justified reasons for entryinto care exist. (Page 9)
- The transfer of a child into alternative care should be carried out with the utmost sensitivity and in a child-friendlymanner, in particular involving specially trained and, in principle, non-uniformed personnel. (Page 13)
- When a child is placed in alternative care, contact with his/her family, aswell as with other persons close to him or her, such as friends, neighbours and previous carers, should be encouraged and facilitated, in keeping with the child’s protection and best interests. The child should have access to information on the situation of his/her familymembers in the absence of contact with them. (Page 13)
- Restriction of contact with members of the child’s family and other persons of special importance to the child should never be used as a sanction. (Page 15)
- Children in care should be offered access to a person of trust in whom they mayconfide in total confidentiality. This person should be designated by the competent authoritywith the agreement of the child concerned. The child should be informed that legal or ethical standards mayrequire breaching confidentialityunder certain circumstances. (Page 15)
- Children in care should have access to a known, effective and impartial mechanism wherebythey can notify complaints or concerns regarding their treatment or conditions of placement. Such mechanisms should include initial consultation, feedback, implementation and further consultation.  (Page 15)
- .To promote the child’s sense of self-identity, a life story book comprising appropriate information, pictures, personal objects and mementoes regarding each step of the child’s life should be maintained with the child’s participation and made available to the child throughout his/her life. (Page 15)
- The role and specific responsibilities of the designated person or entityshould include:(a)Ensuring that the rights of the child are protected and, in particular,thatthe child has appropriate care, accommodation, health-care provision, developmental opportunities, psychosocial support, education and language support;(b)Ensuring that the child has access to legal and other representation where necessary, consulting with the child so that the child’s views are taken into account by decision-making authorities, and advising and keeping the child informed of his/her rights;(c)Contributing to the identification of a stable solution inthe best interestsof the child;(d)Providing a link between the child and various organizations that may provide services to the child;(e)Assisting the child in familytracing;(f)Ensuring that, if repatriation or family reunification is carried out, it is done in the best interests of the child;(g)Helping the child to keep in touch with his/her family, when appropriate. (Page 16)
- Identifying, registering and documenting unaccompanied or separated children are priorities in anyemergencyand should be carried out as quicklyas possible. (Page 22)

## Source
[[Guidelines on Alternative Care_UN.pdf]]