---
title: CHILDCARE PRACTICES, MORBIDITY STATUS AND NUTRITION STATUS OF PRESCHOOL CHILDREN (24-59 MONTHS) LIVING IN ORPHANAGES IN KWALE COUNTY, KENYA
author: SCHOOL OF APPLLIED HUMAN SCIENCES OF KENYATTA UNIVERSITY
tags :
- globalresearch
---
Tags: [Nutrition](Volume%201/Roll%20Ups/Nutrition/Nutrition.md)
Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1lIj3c08kiHUy9WmxQ4Usc1TNC4KLm_T4/view?usp=sharing

Context: To determine the childcare practices, morbidity status and nutrition status of preschool children 24-59 months of age living in orphanages in Kwale County,Kenya. A cross-sectional analytical study was conducted on a comprehensive sampleof 162 children and 45 caregivers, drawn from a sample of 14 out of the 21orphanages in Kwale County, Kenya. (Page 14)

# What are the determinants? 

- According to this framework, dietary intake and health status are immediate determinants of child's nutrition status. (Page 21)
- Adequate dietary intake and good health statustranslate to good nutrition status of the child. (Page 21)
- Prevailing conditions in orphanages may predispose children to increased prevalenceof malnutrition and infectious diseases like diarrhoea and respiratory tract infectionsUnavailability of safe and nutritious foods in orphanage set up and access to safewater are likely to lead to increase levels of malnutrition among children. (Page 22)
- However, studies haveestablished that most caregivers lack nutrition awareness and that once a child reachespreschool age, caregivers divert their attention from the children to other matters andcare giving becomes a secondary issue. Thus, the nutrition needs are neglected (Mile,Milena and Biljana, 2013). (Page 26)
- The consumption of a varied diet and frequency of feeding are important indicatorsfor the attainment of adequate dietary intake. (Page 26)
- Child malnutrition is associated with susceptibility to infection and as a result manychildren are more likely to be prone to common childhood ailments such as diarrhoeaand respiratory infections; and for those who survive, frequent illness affects theirnutrition status due to lowered resistance to infections (Page 27)
- Hand washing is effective in minimizing incidence of diseases such as cholera anddiarrhoea among children. It also reduces deaths from diarrhoea and acute respiratoryinfections by almost half and one quarter respectively (Page 28)
- Furthermore, when less than 40 children share one latrine is usuallyconsidered fair, forty to one hundred children using one latrine is classified bad and100 children sharing a single latrine is dangerous (Page 28)
- Various studies have shown that illness among children in orphanages is higher (30%)especially diarrheal disease compared with 7 % in non-orphanage children. It has alsobeen shown that more boys are usually stunted with high morbidity rates than girls (Page 28)
- In a study carried out inBotswana (Misra & Bignami, 2008) it was found that children in orphanages were49% more likely to be underweight than non-orphanage children. The findingsconcurred with those of Lindblade et al. (2003) in Malawi where it was demonstratedthat the prevalence of malnutrition in children in orphanages (below 6 years old) was55% compared with 30% of non-orphanage children. (Page 29)
- The same study showed thatamong children in orphanages, 64% were stunted compared with 46% of the non- (Page 29)
- 16orphanage children. In addition, girls in orphanages were more likely to bemalnourished than boys. (Page 30)
- Research has demonstrated that positive interaction between achild and a caregiver significantly impacts the development of the brain (Page 31)
- Nutrition of preschool children is of paramount importance as it forms the platformfor growth and development (Chea et al., 2017). Nutrition has a direct impact inchild’s life. Inadequate nutrition among preschool children attributed to poorchildcare practices may result in retarded growth (Page 32)
- A structured researcher-administered questionnaire for caregivers was the main datacollection tool. It was used to collect socio-demographic data, dietary intake, healthcare practices and anthropometric data. An observation checklist and Key InformantInterview (KII) guide were used to gather information on experiences and challengeson dietary practices, health care, water, hygiene, sanitation and other concernsrelevant to the study about children in orphanages. (Page 39)
- Data on dietary practices was collected using a 7 day food frequency questionnaireand a 24-hour food recall. Anthropometric data was collected using SECA scale andpaediatric height board. (Page 39)
- Water and Hygiene practices were assessed by collecting information on whetherthere was availability and accessibility of water for drinking and washing hands,frequency of brushing teeth and bathing, availability of latrines/ toilets or bathroomsand human waste disposal. Caregivers who reported bathing the children daily wererated as having good bathing hygiene while those who bathed children four to sixtimes a week and less than four times a week were rated as having adequate and poorbathing hygiene respectively (UNICEF, 2009c). (Page 42)
- Respondents were to try to remember everything they fed the child and were providedwith household measures used in the institution while feeding children. Thesehousehold measures included; cups, plates, jugs, metallic containers and spoons.Caregivers were asked to measure total amounts of food served and total amountseaten. These amounts were measured and converted into weights measurements. Allthe ingredients in the meals and their weights were recorded. Food models andpictures were used to help respondent judge and report portion size. (Page 44)
- Involvement of the community by supporting the running of the orphanages throughboth participatory and material support was viewed as long term solution to theseproblems. Participatory support would help in maintaining good discipline, moralvalues and life skills of the children and material support would ensure that their basicneeds (health status and nutrition well-being) are met. (Page 55)
- In the present study, majority (79.0%) of the preschool children consumed adequateamounts of recommended energy per day. (Page 56)
- For protein intake, nearly all (90.1%) children consumed adequate amounts ofrecommended proteins per day (Page 57)
- Prevalence of undernutrition seemed to increase significantly with an increase inlength of stay in the orphanage (Page 69)
- Children whose caregivers had not received any form of training on childcarepractices were more likely to be underweight, wasted and stunted respectively. (Page 72)
- The number of children served by each caregiver is critical to higher quality care.Poor caregiver to child ratio not only inhibits social interaction, but also influences theway caregiver responds to the needs of the children. Although young children ingroup care often fail to thrive, tend to be sickly and often demanding of attention;provision of supportive and stable caregiver to child relationships is of paramountimportance (Page 75)
- However caregivers were on rotating shifts in most institutions anddiscouraged individualized care. “We discourage individualized care so that childrendon’t develop a preferred attachment to a specific caregiver” (Page 75)
- For reintegration purposes, every child in an orphanage should have an individualizedcase plan that minimizes the time spent in an orphanage and facilitates eventualintegration into a family ( (Page 77)
- Skipping breakfast during childhood hasbeen associated with malnutrition and may also have an adverse effect on cognitivefunction, academic performance, psychosocial function and mood in children andyoung people (Page 81)
- Deworming has health benefits in children as worms impact negatively on the mentaland physical development of children. Ample evidence have shown that deworminghas a significant impact on health, education and livelihoods of treated children (Page 87)
- Outcomes of deworming include decreased anaemia and improvesnutrition, increases growth and weight gain, improves cognition and mental andphysical development, increases resistance to other infections, supports more frequentschool attendance, improves children’s ability to learn better and be more active in (Page 87)
- 74school. (Page 88)
- Consumption of meat, fruits and vegetables was low. Low consumption of fruits andvegetables could expose children to the risk of micronutrient deficiencies that takelong to manifest. All children were served same quantities of food. The difference inenergy intake was a result of poor appetite, illness among children as well as age. (Page 93)
- The most prevalent illnesses were acute respiratory infections (ARIs),malaria and diarrhoeal diseases. (Page 93)
- Nutrition status (underweight) showed a positive significant relationship withinstitutional characteristics and dietary practices. (Page 94)
- The results imply that the longer a child stays in the orphanage, the more likely thechild would be stunted and underweight. Children who consumed adequate energyintake were less likely to be underweight and stunted respectively (Page 94)
- From the study, it can be concluded that good nutrition status can be equated withappropriate childcare practices and low morbidity burden. Majority of children livingin orphanages in Kwale County had good nutrition status as depicted by the low levelsof undernutrition. This was likely due to consumption of at least three meals per day,diversity of foods consumed, appropriate knowledge in caregiving among thecaregivers in the orphanages, favourable caregiver to child ratios, good health carepractices, adequate consumption of energy and other nutrients. This was alsoenhanced by the effect of the low morbidity burden noted among the children. (Page 95)
- The prevalence of the three forms of under-nutrition in this study was lower than thenational figures. In addition, the levels of undernutrition are also lower than the WHOacceptable levels with an exception of wasting which is higher than the WHOacceptable levels of under-nutrition (Page 95)
- The orphanage’s management in conjunction with the Ministry of Healthshould carry out monthly growth monitoring to detect early onset of (Page 95)
- 82malnutrition among children 6-59 months of age for timely intervention toreduce on cases of malnutrition. (Page 96)
- The orphanages’ management should intensify the supervision of childrenduring meal times to ensure adequate dietary intake and inclusive consumptionof food. A watchful eye and gentle warning can save children frommalnutrition caused by poor dietary intake. (Page 96)

## Source
[[Childcare practices, morbidity status and nutrition status._Annotated copy.pdf]]