---
title: The nutritional status of children living within institutionalized care: a systematic review
author:  London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, University of London, London
tags :
- globalresearch
---
Tags: [Nutrition](Volume%201/Roll%20Ups/Nutrition/Nutrition.md)
Link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7007983/

Context: This review aimed to evaluate currently available data on the nutrition status of children living within institutionalized care. Two (8%) studies reported data from multiple countries, nine (36%) were from Asia, four (16%) from Africa, three (12%) from Eastern Europe, four (16%) from the European Union and one (4%) from each of the remaining regions (Middle East, South America and the Caribbean).

# Challenges prior to admission to CCI

- Highlight page 2: This can be a part of a cyclical interaction between infections and undernutrition which leads to poor nutritional status, illnesses and impacted growth.The first 1,000 days of a child’s life are particularly important because poor nutrition at this stage also predisposes children to long-term impairments such as stunted growth, impaired cognition and poor performance at school and work (Black et al., 2013; UNICEF, 2019).
- Highlight page 3 Children in institutional care often face numerous adversities prior to admission and many enter institutionalized care with pre-existing nutritional, developmental, medical and neurological conditions (Baron, Baron & Spencer, 2001; The Children’s Health Care Collaborative Study Group, 1994; The St Petersburg-USA Orphanage Research Team, 2005; The St. Petersburg- USA Orphanage Research Team, 2008). 
- Some have disabilities or were born prematurely or with low birth weight and many have had exposure to drugs or alcohol, HIV, stress or a range of other issues—all of which can impact their health.
- Highlight page 29: Health status at birth was found to be a significant determinant of development. Growth trajectories and pre- and perinatal circumstances influence children’s development in care: nutrition needs vary depending on individual growth rates and the presence of preexisting nutrition deficiencies. 
- Highlight page 28: Children with disabilities are disproportionately present in institutionalized care settings. (Baron, Baron & Spencer, 2001; The Children’s Health Care Collaborative Study Group, 1994; The St Petersburg-USA Orphanage Research Team, 2005). They are already at increased risk when they enter care centers because disabilities can increase the likelihood of being malnourished due to feeding challenges, malabsorption and/or intake needs. In addition, children with disabilities face the risk of their disabilities worsening in environments that do not meet their individual needs…

# Negative impact of institutionalisation
- Highlight page 11 The nutritional status of children living in institutions has the potential to adversely impact their health and well-being, yet out of 3,602 papers from four major databases, only 25 peer-reviewed papers presented evidence based findings on the children’s nutrition status (Fig. 1). 
- Highlight page 31: Equally as important, our review found that where data was available, children living in institutionalized care were consistently at high risk of malnutrition, commonly experiencing undernutrition, overweight and/or micronutrient deficiencies. The implications for caregivers, clinicians, institutional administration and policy makers is that work is needed to ensure all children’s basic rights to nutrition are met.
- All 25 reviewed studies indicated that many of the children in institutionalized care faced some form of malnutrition. The available data suggests that children living within institutionalized care are commonly malnourished: affected by undernutrition, overweight and micronutrient deficiencies. With few exceptions, mostly of older children, children living within institutionalized care were significantly below standards for growth, diet and micronutrient status and were often below comparison groups of their community peers. 
- Nutrition status varied between care centers and between the ages of children, with younger children at a higher risk of being malnourished. There may be a number of reasons why this is the case, such as younger children have a harder time feeding themselves, especially if disabilities are present, and young, poorly nourished children are at risk of not surviving to become older children in institutional settings (McDonald et al., 2013; Myatt et al., 2018; The Children’s Health Care Collaborative Study Group, 1994). 
- Diet inadequacy, micronutrient deficiencies and illnesses or infections were also found to be prevalent in children of all ages.
- Highlight page 30: Micronutrient deficiencies were common with a prevalence of anemia higher than the global average in the majority of studies (The World Bank Group, 2019). The prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies in children in IBC is likely linked to their increased risk of sickness or morbidities (Black et al., 2013). Hearst et al. (2014) concluded that the growth-related indicators coincide with the high prevalence of low albumin, indicating generalized chronic undernutrition, and suggested macronutrient deficiencies could be due to inadequate diets, infections and/or inflammation, or impaired nutrient absorption or utilization secondary to the psychosocial stress of living in an institution. 
- Dietary diversity was reported to be low for children in IBC, especially in terms of fruits, vegetables and protein. Limited funding and reliance on donations for food were frequently mentioned issues, and resulted in diets high in starches and legumes (Mwaniki, Makokha & Muttunga, 2014).