11th Feb
--------

Foster care rules of nepal. Pushing for later

Child participation paper - BUtterflies India

Development discourses in the 60s, 70s and 80s pitched children’s issues
within the framework of welfare and not within the framework of human
rights. Therefore, most programmes for children would be tagged within
women’s programmes or it would be a health and education issue, seen
from a medical need especially nutrition and vitamin deficiencies,
immunisation or that of enrolling children in schools. One of the
commonest programme during the 70s was mother and child health programme
(MCH). The primary concern at that time by the state and civil society
organisations

was to prevent children from dying of preventable diseases and to
enhance the nutritional intake of poor vulnerable children and improve
enrolment of children in schools. The concept of peoples’ right to
development participation was still evolving. Children were not seen as
a constituency by itself to be recognised and given its due importance.
The concept that they had a fundamental right to participate in
processes where decisions were taken regarding their lives was not
thought of. In fact, the right to participate is a most complex concept.

8th Feb
-------

Reading through statistics of child sexual violence in Nepal

A paper (2002) quoted that 37% of street children were reported to be
victimized by pedophiles. The prevalence of abuse is higher amongst
older children, girls and children living for a longer time on the
streets,

Another study (2010) - 75% steet boys were victims of sexual abuse with
majority (82%) perpetrators being Nepali males, 10% foreigners, 4%
Nepali females and 3% third gender

Butmedia has a bias for reporting the abuse by foreigners eventhough
that number of cases is very less.

Boys learn about sex from phones, internet, tv, pornography. But they
also learn it from watching their parents have sex or overhearing adults
talking abt it.

There is common understnding and an implicit agreement amongst society
that girls are sexually abused as they are vulnerable.

**Victims of sexual abuse said that it was confusing for a boy to
understnad why the abuse happened and they felt anger, rage and gear,
but that the way the family, friends and society reacted and responded
to their pain and emption linked to their future coping mechanisms**

This article basically outlines the sexual abuse of boys (including
victims and perpetrators) in Nepal. Imo since the demography of Nepal
and India are similar, the paper is quite relevant. This paper is based
on interviews conducted with victims, actors, parents and responders. By
understanding the psyche of these stakeholder, I think we can design our
own care practices based on this or at least make sure that the care
practices we come up with takes into accounts the concerns mentioned in
this paper.

**A**
