---
title: Educational intervention planning for children in foster care in Finland, A case study 

author: Raija Pirttimaa & Christine Välivaara

tags:
- practitioner

---
Domain tags: [[Education]]

# Brief:

* Scope & Description: This resource covers a case study of an educational intervention for children in foster care in Finland. Learnings from the intervention are shared.
* Link: 
* Original Link: [https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/20004508.2017.1328932?needAccess=true](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/20004508.2017.1328932?needAccess=true) 
* Date: 
* Author: Raija Pirttimaa & Christine Välivaara
* Summarized By: Aayushi
* Gold Standard Inputs & Outcomes: 
* Baseline Inputs & Outcomes:  


# Problems faced by youth in foster care

* 69% of children in foster care have behavioral problems and experience academic achievement.
* Children in foster care also report low school performance and low grades.

A majority of boys (60%) and 42% of girls in long term foster care group had no or low grades in primary school, compared to 22% and 11% in the majority population. When adjusting for maternal education and birth parents' substance abuse and psychiatric care, those with experiences of in-home interventions and those who aged out of long term foster care (the social services groups) had up to two times as high risk of poor school performance as the majority population. In other analyses of the same data set, former male wards of long term foster care had substantially lower average grades than majority population boys with similar results from cognitive tests at military conscription (Vinnerljung et al., 2010). These results – and small scale studies – clearly indicate that children and youth in long term foster care have high risks of becoming scholastic underachievers in primary school (e.g. Tideman et al., 2011). In addition, earlier analyses of the same data set showed that youth from long term foster care tend to receive lower education than peers with similar grades from primary school and (for males) peers with similar cognitive capacity, as shown in test results at military conscription (Vinnerljung et al., 2010). Youth who left long term care also had a lower chance of getting a secondary education when grades were poor, compared to majority population peers with the same grades. The chance for the national adoptees did not differ significantly from that of the majority population. This is congruent with the fact that alternative study paths, e.g. municipal adult education, are mostly used by resourceful groups (Berggren, 2007). The analyses presented in this article of care leavers, and results from previous analyses from the same data sources (Vinnerljung et al., 2010), present a dark picture of their career in school and in the educational system. Youth that left long term foster care after age 17 have been disadvantaged fivefold; firstly because of their higher risk of poor grades in primary school, secondly because they received lower grades than other children with the same cognitive capacity, thirdly because they got a lower education than peers with similar cognitive capacity (results on males only in Vinnerljung et al., 2010), fourthly because they got lower education than peers with the same average grades from primary school; and fifthly because of their lower chance of achieving a secondary education when grades were poor, e.g. through use of adult education opportunities. For care leavers from long term foster care, time in placement had no or very weak effects on these processes. Furthermore, youth that had aged out of long term foster care had sixto eleven fold sex and birth year adjusted excess risks for psychosocial problems in early adulthood compared to majority population peers. Overrisks were considerably lower for the in-home group and the national adoptee group. No or low grades was the strongest predictive risk factor for adverse outcomes. Sonia Jackson, the doyen of European research on education for foster children, has for decades claimed that low education/poor school results is the greatest risk factor for youth who leave outof-home care (Jackson, 1994). This study strongly supports her hypothesis, which had not been tested in a large sample study before. Actually, all children with poor school performance in compulsory school constitute a high risk group for future psychosocial problems (Vinnerljung et al., 2010). The situation is particularly worrying for children who have been cared for by society during childhood, as – in addition to coming from adverse early childhood backgrounds – many of them also have a weakened family network when they enter into adulthood, partly because many parents are dead (Franzén & Vinnerljung, 2006). Poor school performance followed by low or no education may also have become an increasing disadvantage in recent decades for youth that leave foster care. Growing demands on higher education has led to an extended establishment phase (Lager, Berlin, Danielsson, & Heimerson, 2009), and thus an increasing dependency on parents during young adulthood. In a Swedish interview study with 16 care leavers between ages 18 and 22, worries about how to cope with housing, personal finance and employment were expressed by a majority. In Sweden, there are no systemized care-leaving services and until recently (2008) local authorities had no legal duty to support young people from out-of-home care after age 18. This lack of responsibility from social services may be an effect of the highly developed Swedish general welfare state, where legislators and policy-makers tend to assume that the general welfare services – open to everyone regardless of income and background – are sufficient enough for vulnerable groups of youth. This has resulted in a gap between the needs of the young people leaving care and the support given from social services. (Höjer & Sjöblom, 2009).

Far too little is known about why foster children in long term care perform so poorly in the educational system. Examining different causal hypotheses is outside the scope of this article because of the absence of necessary individual data. What remains is to make interpretations based on other research. Some of the problems are probably explained by individual factors, such as lower cognitive ability and the presence of behavior problems (Vinnerljung et al., 2010). But poorer cognitive capacity does not automatically lead to lower grades. Swedish studies of foreign-born adoptees suggest that a good home environment to a certain extent can compensate the risk of low grades that weaker cognitive skills imply (Lindblad, Dalen, Rasmussen, Vinnerljung, & Hjern, 2009). A recent small scale intensive trial study also revealed that as many as three out of four foster children seem to perform in school far below their cognitive capacity. The same study also showed that foster children ages 8–12 scored substantially higher on an IQ-test (WISC-III) after two years of educational interventions, when compared to their scores at the beginning of the trial (Tideman et al., 2011). Subsequently, there may be good reasons not to view foster children's scores on cognitive tests as a fixed measure of intelligence, but also as an outcome of long term substitute care and cognitive/educational support during time in care — or the lack of such support (cp. French adoption studies by Duyme, Dumaret, & Tomkiewicz, 1999; Schiff et al., 1978). The links between poor school performance and behavior problems are well-known (Johnson, McGue, & Ianoco, 2009), but the direction of the relationship is a two-way street. For some children, behavior problems cause poor school performance, but for others poor school performance cause behavioral problems (Gustafsson et al., 2010). The same dual causeway has been reported for the relation between mental health problems and school failure (ibid.). Since a large host of studies has shown that both behavioral and mental health problems are more prevalent among children in long term foster care than in the majority population, is may be tempting to interpret their higher risk of school failure as an expected consequence of these facts. But the causal mechanisms are not that simple. British researchers have emphasized the importance of a failing system, such as low interest from social services to follow up foster children's progress in school and an unclear allocation of responsibilities between school and social services (reviewed in Vinnerljung, 1998). Whatever the reasons are, international research – and this study –does indicate that the compensatory developmental power of long term foster care in its present “placing out” form is at best weak. This certainly seems to apply for school and education, although Swedish law for many decades has stated that the municipalities have a responsibility for foster children in this area (Vinnerljung et al., 2010). To our knowledge, this responsibility has never been monitored on a national level (Vinnerljung, Öman, & Gunnarson, 2005). The differences between the national adoptees and care leavers from long term foster care are interesting. In this study, the latter group tended to have a higher risk of no or low grades and a lower chance of getting a secondary education, even after adjusting for birth parents education and indication of birth parents substance abuse and psychiatric care. Still, both adoptive and foster parents are investigated and approved by social services. Foster parents have also been commissioned by social services to care for children with difficult life conditions. Why are the differences yet so clear between adoptees and children who grow up in foster care? Scandinavian studies indicate that pessimistic expectations of foster children's chances of success in school are common, both among foster parent, social workers and teachers (Egelund, Hestbaek, & Andersen, 2004; Knudsen, 2009; Tideman et al., 2011). It is probably not realistic to assume that disadvantaged children through interventions should achieve the same average grades as the majority population, but the very high prevalence of no or low grades can hardly be predetermined. Several researchers have pointed out that vulnerable children's school performance can be improved with appropriate interventions (Gottfredson, Wilson, & Table 6 Risk of psychosocial problems by study group. Cox regression. RR (95% CI). Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Suicide attempta Maj. pop. 1 1 1 Nat. ad. 2.35 (1.55–3.58) 1.87 (1.23–2.84) 1.22 (0.75–2.00) In-home 3.51 (3.01–4.10) 2.26 (1.93–2.64) 1.66 (1.42–1.95) Long-term care leav. 6.94 (6.14–7.84) 4.32 (3.82–4.89) 2.28 (1.97–2.65) Drug abusea Maj. pop. 1 1 1 Nat. ad. 2.19 (1.61–2.97) 1.57 (1.16–2.13) 1.15 (0.81–1.62) In-home 4.03 (3.66–4.43) 2.36 (2.14–2.59) 1.80 (1.63–1.99) Long-term care leav. 8.22 (7.59–8.91) 4.57 (4.21–4.95) 2.60 (2.36–2.86) Alcohol abusea Maj. pop. 1 1 1 Nat. ad. 2.06 (1.55–2.75) 1.53 (1.15–2.04) 1.12 (0.81–1.56) In-home 2.96 (2.65–3.30) 1.82 (1.63–2.03) 1.48 (1.32–1.66) Long-term care leav. 5.62 (5.14–6.15) 3.40 (3.10–3.72) 2.17 (1.96–2.42) Serious criminalitya Maj. pop. 1 1 1 Nat. ad. 2.65 (2.11–3.34) 1.86 (1.48–2.34) 1.44 (1.12–1.86) In-home 5.07 (4.70–5.47) 2.80 (2.60–3.03) 2.16 (1.99–2.34) Long-term care leav. 9.20 (8.61–9.83) 4.91 (4.59–5.24) 2.84 (2.62–3.08) Welfare dependencyb Maj. pop. 1 1 1 Nat. ad. 2.35 (1.52–3.65) 1.60 (1.03–2.48) 1.50 (0.95–2.36) In-home 6.07 (5.24–7.02) 3.02 (2.61–3.49) 2.45 (2.10–2.85) Long-term care leav. 10.61 (9.56–11.78) 5.09 (4.57–5.66) 3.40 (2.98–3.87) Model 1 is adjusted for sex and year of birth. Model 2 is adjusted for sex, year of birth and average grade point (interval). Model 3 is adjusted for sex, year of birth, average grade point (interval), maternal education, birth parents' substance abuse and psychiatric care. a Person-time. b Constant time and only those born in 1972–1978 who were registered with their own household at age 25. M. Berlin et al. / Children and Youth Services Review 33 (2011) 2489–2497 2495 Najaka, 2002; Harden, Brunton, Fletcher, & Oakley, 2009; Voisin & Neilands, 2010; Zingraff et al., 1994). In Sweden promising results have been reported from a local project in Helsingborg, supported by the National Board of Health and Welfare, where 25 foster children initially were tested with age-standardized instruments (cognitive capacity, reading and math skills etc.). Test results were used to guide teachers and foster parents, and to systematically give children access to the special education resources normally available at all schools. At retest after two years, the average test scores had increased significantly in nearly all tests, including cognitive ability tested with WISC-III (Tideman et al., 2011).

Poor educational performance should be regarded as a main determinant for care leavers' future life chances. It can be influenced and improved while children are in societal care (e.g. Flynn, Paquet, & Marquis, 2010; Tideman et al., 2011). Furthermore, there should be extended incitements for young adults who have been in long term public care to repair earlier school failure through adult education. We do not subscribe to the hypothesis that the results reported here are inevitable, just because adverse early childhood experiences are common among care leavers from long term foster care.


# Factors integral to improving educational outcomes of youth in foster care

* Cooperation: Those closest cooperation partners to each case are schoolteachers, the family and the child. It is important to engage children in discussions as well as assessments. Cooperative efforts must be organized with different partners, including the foster families, school staff, local social workers, and other significant local actors.
* Teaching: Teachers are the main agents for directing schoolwork. Successful teaching is possible if objectives are suitable for the student. Differentiation of materials and methods is useful. It is also good when teachers have immediate access to a range of services (special education, assistants, etc.) and are supported by school principals. 
* Child’s growth and development: Educators should trust in the normal development and growth of the child. Children mature at their own individual pace, and as they grow, they will better understand their situation and set their own goals, when the time is right for them. 

