---
title: Institutionalised Children, Seminar on Standards of Care and Mental Health
author: Akshay
tags :
- Practitioner
---
Tags: [Mental Health](Mental%20Health) [Caregiving](Volume%201/Roll%20Ups/Caregiving/Caregiving.md)
Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/10nuywFDUmvMr4wwNlF3qHIJhb096x5Pz/view?usp=sharing

### Resource People
- First and foremost, my heartfelt gratitude goes to Dr. Monisha-Nayar Akhtar, Dr. Deepak Gupta and Mr. (Page 5)
- Luis Aguilar Esponda for their deep involvement and commitment to the seminar. I would also like to thankMr. Vikram Dutt (Page 5)
- A technical team of child rights advocates and experts was constituted to support the seminar:• Ms. Enakshi Ganguly and Ms. Bharti Ali, Co-Directors, Haq: Centre for Child Rights;• Ms. Mamta Sahai, Member, Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights (DCPCR);• Mr. Mohammad Aftab, National Manager, Child Protection, Save the Children;• Ms. Nina Nayak, Child Rights Activist formal member, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights(NCPCR), India;• Ms. Razia Ismail, Director, India Alliance for Child Rights;• Ms. Sumitra Mishra, Country Director, iPartner India;• Ms. Tushar Anchal, Adviser, Child Protection, Plan India;• Ms. Vijaylakshmi Arora, Director - Policy & Advocacy, CRY;• Mr. Vikram Srivastava, Founder, Independent Th ought (iTh ought). (Page 15)

## Current realities about life in CCIs

- Some studies have found that violence in residential institutions is six times higher than violence in foster care, and that children in group care are almost four times more likely to experience sexual abuse than childrenin family-based care.16 (Page 17)
- Small institutions developed on community based models can actually guarantee a healthy growth to specific kinds of children. For example a small group setting with trained staff  can provide the needed therapeutic care-or treatment for children who have suffered trauma or severe abuse or neglect. To enable large sibling groups to-remain together, a residential care setting may also be the best option.20 (Page 19)

### SOS Model
- Every Home is composed by small groups of boys and girls of different age who live together as siblings. Natural brothers and sisters are of course kept together. A SOS Mother, who is a child care professional, lives with them, guiding their development and running the household independently. She has the duty to recognise and respect each child’s cultural and religious background.SOS families live together, forming a supportive village environment where children enjoy a happy childhood. The families help one another and are well integrated with the surrounding local community. When poor children and families live in the vicinity of the children’s villages and neighbourhood, SOS provides services for them through the Family Strengthening Programme(FSP). (Page 20)
- • Th e necessity principle: ensure that children do not fi nd themselves in alternative care unnecessarily; and• Th e suitability principle: where out-of-home care is provided, it is delivered under appropriate conditionsresponding to the child’s rights and best interests. (Page 21)
- Furthermore the necessity principle implies the establishment of a robust gatekeeping mechanism, capable ofensuring that children are admitted to the alternative care system only if all possible means of keeping them withtheir parents or extended family have been examined (Page 21)
- Udayan Care has set up 13 homes children’s homes in North India which host over 200 children and young adults in theirLiving in Family Environment (LIFE) programme. Every home has a team of mentor parents, who are life-time volunteers,caregivers, and mental health professionals. (Page 23)
- Each Udayan Ghar (Home) hosts 12 children of the same gender and is situated in a middle-class neighbourhood to facilitateintegration with the community. Opportunities to study at the best private schools, even universities, or get vocational train-ing are given to all the children, on the basis of their individual talents and interests. Comprehensive healthcare and mentalhealth programmes are individually developed for all the children.As in a family, children are given time for leisure, hobbies and fun. In addition to the daily routines, like attending school,doing homework, participating in household chores, the children regularly attend educational and recreational workshops.Udayan Care in fact organises plenty of seasonal camps that offer sport, games, and songs to create a sense unity amongthe children and the staff.Child participation is assured during the monthly family meetings, where children themselves set the agenda and discuss allissues pertaining to their lives and their homes. All members of staff are also taken care of through constant capacity build-ing workshops and meetings aimed at creating an effective team-work among people with different backgrounds and skills. (Page 23)
- A comprehensive psycho-social programme for institutionalised children in their journey to Recoveryin ICEB, Vol. 1, No. 1, Mar-Aug 2014, pp.79-90 (Page 23)
- Especially in residential institutions funded by religious bodies or in governmental institutions of countries withlittle concern for the beliefs of minorities, children’s right to equality and non-discrimination could be seriouslyneglected. All children placed in institutions should have opportunities to express their opinions, practice theirreligion, function in their native language and participate in social activities in the community they belong to.Children’s right to equality and non-discrimination should be always upheld. (Page 25)
- Additionally, both the UN Guidelines for Alternative Care and the CRC,Article 25, entitle all children in institutions to have a periodic review of all aspects of their placement, ideallyevery three months, intended to ensure that their stay in the Home is as short as possible. (Page 25)
- Article 126, Guidelines for the Alternative Care, United Nations General Assembly, A/HRC/11/L.13, 15 June 2009. (Page 25)
- It is advisable that educational and healthcare facilities are separate from residentialcare facilities. Th is not only helps the children feel they are part of a larger society, but it off ers them the possibility of finding multiple protective circles apart from the institution. (Page 26)
- It is important to distinguish the monitoring mechanism carried out by independent bodies from the children’s complaint mechanisms. Th e latter should work as a first call at the facility level; the children, or eventually, their-parents or the staff , should be able to communicate any type of concern to the institution’s management. Th independent monitoring mechanisms instead is a national structure, ideally with regional and local outreach, that might be contacted by anybody if a direct approach to the facility is deemed impossible or unsatisfactory inits results.36 (Page 28)
- . They should be granted access to all information and records about the treatment and condition of children and should be allowed to conduct interviews with children on a confidential basis. Th e inclusion of women as part of the inspection teams is particularly significant where the institution hosts girls.37 (Page 28)
- Visits are much more effective in terms of promoting sustained improvement in the conditions and treatment of children if they take place regularly and systematically. If visits to the institutions by external commissions are carried out only sporadically, they may do more harm than good. Especially with regard to cases of violence and abuse, visits might create expectations of justice among the children, which are often not fulfilled; they migh tgenerate more violence and abuse in a circle of punishment for spies and reward for silent spectators; and, in a system prone to corruption, external commissions might even be monitored by some lobbies.39 (Page 28)
- Independent Monitoring Mechanisms for children in detention, Justice for Children No. 2, UK-AID & PRI. (Page 28)
- International Colloquium on Juvenile Justice: A Report, 16-18 March 2013, p. 47. (Page 28)
- In general it is advisable that caregivers are not too old and the generational gap among them and the children reﬂects that between children and parents. (Page 29)
- Every institution should have a staff code of conduct that defines the role of each professional and of the caregivers in particular, and includes clear reporting procedures on allegations of misconduct by any team member. (Page 29)
- facilities should systematically ensure that, prior to employment, caregivers and other staff  in direct contact with children undergo an appropriate and comprehensive assessment of their suitability to work with children. (Page 29)
- Cultural, social, gender and religious sensitisation should also be assured. Training in dealing appropriately with challenging behaviour, including conflict resolution techniques and means to prevent acts of harm or self-harm, should be provided to all care staff  employed by the institutions’ management. In (Page 29)
- 17In addition, it is important the training underlines the concept of a therapeutic40Article 130, Guidelines for Alternative Care.41Articles 104-116, Guidelines for the Alternative Care.42Empowering direct care workers who work with children and youth in institutional care, Gordon R. Hodas MD, p.1During the seminar it was underlined that inSouth Asia training is always too brief. Institutions’ staff receives one-week, or one-month, comprehensive training in the best cases, while actually years of preparation, at academic level, are required. (Page 29)
- boundary, which means that a caregiver should act as a professional and not as a friend to the child, there by reducing the possibility of a conflict of interest or inappropriate conduct.43 (Page 30)
- Especially in terms of mental health care, the positive mental health of the staff  often translates into positive outcomes for the children (Page 30)
- Dr. Sen advised towards a major consideration of the roles of caregivers when applying certain changes to the everyday management of the institution, especially because, in terms of mental health care, a comprehensive approach, where the caregivers, the managers and the psychologists and psychiatrists work together, is needed.Hierarchy among personnel is often significant and not carefully evaluated, which seriously affects the functioning of institutions. (Page 30)
- Hence children with disabilities are frequently at higher risk of staff  violence in institutions than other boys and girls, necessitating more efforts, competence and open-minded attitude from the duty bearers to adequately fulfil, respect and protect their rights. (Page 32)
- First of all, children with disabilities are often not entitled to their right to independence and little effort is made to assure that the infrastructures of the institutions they live in can guarantee them not only a child-friendly environment, but especially one which supports their independent living. Their right to development is rarely considered and little is done to ensure that children with disabilities gain adequate education and life skills, fulfilling the prejudice that they cannot support themselves once they reach adulthood. (Page 34)
- UNICEF’s report Th e State of the World’s Children, 2012, states that in India there are 31 million orphan children.Th e National Family Health Survey (NFHS), 2005-06,counts around 20 million children who have lost both or one parent (4.9 percent of the entire child population of the country), with 100,000 orphans estimated only in the state of Jammu & Kashmir. Th e Integrated ChildProtection Scheme (ICPS) counts 180 million children in need of care and protection, while the 2012 StatisticalReport by the Ministry of Statistics and ProgrammeImplementation states that almost 34,000 children are in conflict with the law. (Page 41)
- Ms. Razia IsmailConvenor, India Alliance for Child Rights (Page 42)
- Service delivery structures available at three levels of administration: -Central Level: the Central Project Support Unit, Childline India Foundation (CIF), the Central Adoption ResourceAuthority (CARA) and the National Institute on Public Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD); -State Level: State Support Units, State Child Protection Society and State Adoption Resource Agency; -District Level: Child Protection Society and Specialised Adoption Agencies. (Page 42)
- In 2007 theNational Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR)’s Study on Observation Homes in nine Indian states found overcrowding, low quality food, poor sanitation, absence of water, lack of productive activity and failure to segregate CNCP and CICL as the status quo in majority of the institutions inspected. (Page 43)
- Additionally, the Study on Child Abuse conducted in 2007 by the Ministry of Women and Child Development(MWCD) recorded that 56.73 percent of children in institutions in 13 Indian states reported having been subjected to physical abuse by the staff  members of institutions. (Page 43)
- New ﬁnancial norms have been enhanced for the construction of facilities (Rs. 1000 (USD 16.6 ca.)/sq.ft. from the previousRs. 600 (USD 10 ca.)/sq.ft.) and for the maintenance grant in the Homes, open shelters, and specialised adoption agencies(from the previous allocation of Rs. 750 (USD 12.4 ca.) per child per month to Rs. 2000 (USD 33.2 ca.) per child per month). (Page 44)
- In 2012, a small group consisting of mental health and other professionals connected with the care of children in institutions started discussing and envisaging what later took shape to be the Journal Institutionalised Children: Explorations andBeyond (ICEB). (Page 50)
- THE MOST FREQUENT DISORDERS WHICH AFFECT CHILDREN IN INSTITUTIONS:• Somatic disorders (eating disorders, skin lesions, respiratory disorders, digestive disorders, sphincter disorders);• Attachment disorders (unable to attach or permanent fusion attachment);• Behavioural and thinking disorders (mood disorders, delinquency, impulsivity, inhibition, violence, failures in learning);• Self-injury (cuts, burns, bites – prostitution, drug addiction, homelessness), suicide;• Psychiatric disorders (anorexia, anxiety neurosis and traumatic childhood psychoses). (Page 52)
- finding the right balance between enhancing children’s hopes and dreams but at the same time providing them with accessible opportunities, vocational skills, and intelligent solutions compatible with their capacities and the job-market demand. (Page 54)
- The institution has to play a role in this respect, because the lack of knowledge among families about the value of parental and family contact for emotional wellbeing seems to bean important issue to be tackled in the region. (Page 54)
- Children need time and different spaces where they can be able to be and think alone. They have a right to privacy as all human beings, and especially the right to develop their own thoughts. They have the right to their own time, and also the right to their own space. F (Page 54)
- The living space should be safe and comfortable, but children should have the possibility of investing in it, changing it, personalising it. (Page 55)
- But how can residential care guarantee the children a complete social development if they do not let them interact with people of the opposite sex as it happens in the real world outside the institution? (Page 55)
- The most important emotional ties a child builds are those created before s/he reaches five years of age; (Page 56)
- Infant Attachment BehavioursYoung Child Attachment BehavioursAdolescent Attachment Behaviours• Smiling• Reaching• Vocalising• Crying• Crawling• Walking• Affection• Comfort Seeking• Reliance on caregiver for help• Cooperation• Exploration• Controlling behaviour• Reunion response• Response to strangers• Active avoidance of caregiver in times of stress• Emphasis on the exploratory aspects of the attachment systems • Autonomy-seeking behaviour in adolescence is positively correlated to secure infant attachment• Expansion of attachment relationships into intimate peer relationships (Page 57)
- Disorganised attachment is significant in traumatised children because it takes place when the child does not receive enough emotional support, directions and structure by his/her care givers or when the environment surrounding the child is particularly stressful. (Page 58)
- From the presentation of Dr. Monisha Nayar, clinical psychologist, Psychoanalytic Center of Philadelphia, USA (Page 58)
- Institutionalised children easily face disorganised attachment, putting immense stress on their caregivers. They need attachment based therapies and caregivers who can provide safety and consistency. It is important for children living in institutions to experience rituals of separation, to grow, to let go, without tears. (Page 58)
- At the sametime, it is imperative for caregivers to know how to prepare the children in case they are leaving the institution for a different job, instead of disappearing and suddenly leaving them alone. (Page 58)
- TECHNIQUES TO HELP EGO-RESILIENCY• Role plays and rehearsals• Group discussions• Fostering bonds and kinship/buddy systems• Modelling• Reframing• Helping to think of adversities as a paradox (Page 60)
- One more very effective technique to help children in developing resilience is Reframing. Dr. MonishaNayar, during the Seminar, emphasised that children in institutions need to learn how to construct a narrative of their lives. Reframing is in fact a technique originated in the area of family therapy based on the observation that we all have stories about ourselves. Th e way we organise the themes within our own narratives can be constructive or destructive for us. Th rough the technique of reframing, the caregivers, or the counsellors, can capitalise the subjective nature of personal stories to uncover underlying, underemphasised themes in children’s backgrounds that are potentially helpful. (Page 60)
- The Participatory Action Research (PAR) was a six month study involving researchers, caretakers, administrators, and children. The aim was to deﬁne an Appropriate Technique and an Efﬁcient Management Strategy in the care of children with behavioural difﬁculties. PAR has three essential ingredients:• Developing Self-understanding;• Paying Attention to Insights;• Respecting the other and Reciprocity.To be able to do PAR effectively, basic communication skills are also important. Listening to understand is the most im-portant communication skill that we often miss. There are some very helpful attitudes for a Participatory Approach thatwe could take from Carl Rogers, the founder of Humanistic Psychology:• Empathy or Accurate Understanding;• Non-Judgemental Attitude or Unconditional Positive Regard;• Genuineness or truthfulness.What did we want to achieve through PAR? We intended involving the children in ﬁnding a more meaningful way to ex-press themselves. We also wanted to involve the staff as partners in this dialogue. We attempted to evolve a self-sustain-ing and participatory methodology to solve the daily problems of aggression among children. (Page 61)
- Excerpts from A Participatory Approach in the Care of Children with Behavioural Difﬁculties or Disabilities by Fr. John Tharakan SDB (Page 61)
- The impact of trauma for each child can vary extremely and must be correctly evaluated. It depends on different variables:• The age and sex of the child at the time of loss;• The nature and quality of the links before the break;• Violence suff ered;• The context of early breaks;• Th e quality and diversity of care;• Self-esteem and resilience of each child. (Page 62)
- Most service providers ask the children to repeatedly narrate their stories, putting them through undeniable pain. In the worst cases, children are blamed for their negative experiences, or get further maltreated,• If this has happened anything can happen to me.Dr. Achal BhagatSenior Consultant Psychiatrist andPsychotherapist, Apollo Hospital, Calcutta (Page 62)
- abused or neglected by those who should take care of them. (Page 63)
- Words like institutions, residential care facilities andHomes are more appropriate and their widespread usage would reduce the general misconception that children living inthem do not have a family.Besides that, many of the words used to refer to children in institutions might victimise them further, labelling them withtheir past experiences of abuse and neglect, or with their present experience within an institution. M (Page 63)
- It is important to attend to the language used to deﬁ ne both institutions and the children living in them, especially among (Page 64)
- practitioners, to ensure that children do not suffer additional victimisation through adverse labelling. (Page 64)
- We need to ensure ties are maintained between children in institutions and their families.Siblings have to be kept together in institutions and in cases of adoption (Page 65)
- Caregivers should be as constant as possible and, when about to leave their jobs for any reason, they should know how toprepare the children to de-attach. (Page 66)
- Acouple of the participants mentioned that the staff  of the institutions is less aware of the talents and qualities ofthe children in comparison to a family, where every child gets special attention from his/her parents; or that inthe Homes it often happens that only children with particular capacities are cared for, while others are left behind. (Page 81)
- . Among the positive aspects, the love and care that the staff  showed to the children was the fi rst point mentioned, together with thefacilities available and good education (Page 82)
- Others also explained that if they had a fi ght or a particularsituation outside the institution, they could not always share it with the staff , because they would have made a bigdeal out of it. Some of them underlined that sometimes they felt NGOs interfered too much in their lives. (Page 82)
- Adults’ ResponsibilitiesMaintain impartiality / Abolish biasness Motivate, encourage and appreciate the childrenComprehend children’s need and solve their problemsNo blaming, imposing, bullying or blackmailing childrenBeing open minded, not orthodoxListen to children and their solutionsFollow the rules and have disciplineBe attentive and concernedLove all the children with no discrimination (Page 83)
- Every child should have an individual care plan on the basis of his/her qualities and capabilities; the staff  should not focus only on talented children, but give equal attention and opportunities to all the children. (Page 84)
- All the members of the staff  should be well-prepared to work in an institution (Page 84)
- discipline but also freedom (Page 84)
- Teenagers have to be given little freedom of carrying out some responsibilities on their own and boysand girls about to reach 18 have to get permiss (Page 84)
- ion to spend some time out of the institutions alone (Page 84)
- Children should participate more intensively in the life in institutions, (Page 84)

### CONSTRAINTS OF AN INSTITUTIONAL SETTING

• Compulsion to follow an imposed structure in day to day activities.
• Lack of access to the world outside the boundaries of the institutional structure.
• Inability to get special care and personalised space.
• Moral code imposed by the administrative policies of the institutional set up.
• Lack of provisions to accommodate the change in individual rights when girls turn 18 years of age.
• Provisions for a counselor are insufficient to appoint competent individuals.
• Only a limited set of livelihood training programmes can be made available – not sufficient to cater to individual future aspirations.
• Limited access to the outer world due to lack of mobility and exposure.

## Source
[[Institutionalised _Children_Revised Annotated_Akshay.pdf]]

#readinglist 

- Moving forward: Implementing the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, CELCIS, Glasgow, 2012, p. 34. (Page 19)
