## Inputs on the reading logistics: 

**1. Process streamlining is crucial to ensure a few things:**
- Improved clarity about the end product for Glo & Meks to get their notes in better shape
- Real-time problem solving takes away attention from the process and changes pace.
- Reading unrelated papers is minimal keeping time constraints in mind. 
- Need to extract the most value out of CAP3, look at CAP like we look at volunteers; iron out the process and create a solid tutorial. 

**1. Need to spend money **now**** 
- Not spending upfront affects the process efficiency
Immediate fixes: 
-Figure out process flow for unhighlightable papers- Do they exist in editable format on certain subscriptions? 
-Create a tutorial on using tags effectively- Keep the note instructions updated. 

the process section of the notes isn't very easy to understand -- so summarizing it here once more:
1. review our notes & give us clarity on how you'll be translating this into obsidian -- so we can ensure the notes format / tags etc are done in a manner that it'll be efficient for you
2. while templatizing tagging right at the start of the reading didn't make sense -- now that we're done with 7 papers (mekha + glo), it's probably time to introduce common tags with a description of the themes that can be tagged under them etc to give further clarity / certainty 
3. problem solving on what software to use while highlighting or solving for converting a pdf into editable version etc to make the reading easier during the limited reading time block we have severely affects pace. if the issues can be taken up on priority and resolved -- or assign owners to get it resolved, that'll help. eg. if we're not directly using obsidian, and pdf highlights is the way to go -- prioritise buying the require software to enable the reading. 
4. buying stuff for smooth secondary research - 3,05,000 is allocated towards buying books, subscribe to libraries etc. we have spent little. 1. let's check if highlightable versions of all our readings are available in libraries and if yes, buy subscriptions or get it for free from minal / somebody in time before queueing it for a read 2. buy the required software -- if you want to buy what is most useful, across platforms then do research fast and buy off. I am not sure if we can spend this money on other things once the peak of secondary research phase is over.

## Reading Journal (Imp takeaways) 
- Nepal's demography is similar to us, the behaviour analysis and qualitative studies can also apply to us. 
- Can we design an assessment to ascertain where children are on sex education? What are their preconceived ideas before entering the CCI or currently? 
- How do we design language knowing that everyday language can lead to how we perceive gender and sex? 
- Note: **Human Centred Design** looks really important here. 
- With well-prepared caregiving modules, like the one offered by Prerna, how do we deliver the content in the most effective way? Should consider getting animators or behaviour comms folks as SMEs.
- Are there studies on LGBTQ children in CCI? 
- Can we read more about how to deal with adolescent kids? This seems to be a common CCI concern 

#readinglist 
- World Vision releases a child wellbeing report (for assessment indicators)
- Union Budget discussed 159 programs meant for children 
- Nutritional outcome indicators from the National Child Health tracking records (India has an Anaemia Mukth Score Card) 
